KESTREL - one binary for the three things this project can demonstrate
=====================================================================

BUILDING IT
    cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
    cmake --build build --config Release

That produces exactly ONE executable: build\Release\kestrel.exe. The live
sim, the demo, the object-lock tracker and the planner baselines are all
compiled into
it -- there is no voxel_live.exe or voxel_sim.exe to keep beside it any more.

If the configure step fails it will be on OpenCV, which is the only hard
dependency. Point CMake at your install and try again:

    cmake -B build -DOpenCV_DIR=C:/opencv/build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release

Only core, imgproc and imgcodecs are required. highgui (windows) and videoio
(video files) are each optional and each prints a status line saying whether
it was found; without them the sim is headless and `track` takes an image
sequence instead of a video, which is the better regression input anyway.

Double-click  kestrel.exe        THE WINDOW. Pick track / bench / sim / train /
                                watch down the left, set it up on the right,
                                RUN. Every command is reachable from here --
                                the train panel also has buttons to install the
                                RL stack into the right interpreter and to list
                                every python on the machine.

Every panel prints the exact command it is about to run along the bottom, so
the window is a way to find the CLI rather than a substitute for it -- anything
you can click you can also type, and a screenshot of the window is a
reproducible run.

    kestrel gui              the same window, explicitly
    kestrel menu             the text menu, for a headless box or over ssh
    kestrel gui --shot out   render the panels to out_*.png with no display
    kestrel gui --check      assert the layout has not broken (runs in ctest)

With no display -- ssh without -X -- a bare `kestrel` says so and drops to the
text menu rather than dying. A build without OpenCV highgui does the same.

  kestrel track --box X Y SIZE --csv out.csv frames*.png
        object lock over recorded frames or a video. --box designates the
        target on the FIRST frame; without it the centre is used, which is
        only right if that is where the target is. Prints lock rate and
        writes a per-frame state timeline.

  kestrel bench --worlds forest maze --seeds 101 108
        the non-RL path-planner baselines, through the SAME environment a
        learned policy uses. These are the numbers a policy has to beat.

  kestrel sim [args...]
        the live voxel sim, running IN this process. Takes voxel_live's
        flags unchanged: --replay FILE.kdr, --live, --rs-check, --sim.
        --pose fixed|vio|slam says WHERE THE CAMERA IS (the window's
        "camera position" row): fixed builds the map where the camera
        stands; vio tracks it with DepthVio on the IR image; slam with
        ORB-SLAM3 through a running kestrel-orbslam (Linux; see
        onboard/orbslam/README.md). In --sim the camera then moves (--move
        E N U, m/s) and the plan pane shows the estimate's drift and lag.

  kestrel train [args...]
        RL training. This is the one command that leaves the process, and
        that is not a packaging failure: the trainer is PyTorch and
        stable-baselines3 driving the C++ environment through the voxelenv
        module. Embedding libpython would not remove that dependency, it
        would pin the exe to one interpreter's ABI. kestrel checks the
        imports first and names the pip command if one is missing.

Video support is optional. Without OpenCV's videoio, `track` still runs over
an IMAGE SEQUENCE -- deterministic and diffable where a video decode is
neither, so it is the better thing to regression-test against.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

THE OTHER TOOLS - not built by default
======================================

Everything below is still in the tree and still builds; it is simply off the
default target, so a plain build leaves you with one exe instead of a folder
of them. To get them:

    cmake -B build -DNAV_SIM_ALL_TARGETS=ON     the tools
    cmake -B build -DBUILD_TESTS=ON             the tools and the ctest suite
    cmake --build build --target voxel_gui      or just the one you want

  voxel_gui.exe    point-and-click front end: fly a synthetic forest
  voxel_sim.exe    the scriptable batch version of the same sim

VOXEL_LIVE - the real map and planner over real depth
(`kestrel sim`; the flags below are its flags)


VOXEL_LIVE - the real map and planner over real depth

Runs the SAME VoxelMap and TrajectoryPlanner as the simulator, over frames from
an actual camera. A menu opens: LIVE CAMERA / REPLAY A RECORDING / SIMULATED
FOREST, then START.

There is NOTHING to install for the live camera to work. librealsense is loaded
at runtime, so this exe needs no SDK to have been present when it was built. It
needs realsense2.dll to be findable when you RUN it, which it is if you have
installed the RealSense SDK or the Viewer.

  To check, with no camera plugged in, open PowerShell here and run:
      .\kestrel.exe sim --rs-check

  -> "librealsense 2.58.3 (realsense2.dll)"   good, LIVE will be enabled
  -> "could not load librealsense. Tried: ..."  copy realsense2.dll next to
     this exe, or put its folder on PATH. The list tells you where it looked.

In the view:  space pause   v first-person <-> overlay   s save PNG
              m menu        q quit

  DEPTH         what the camera returned. GREY IS NO RETURN, not far away.
  FIRST PERSON  the map from inside. Pale is UNKNOWN, drawn as fog, never air.
                It shows the 0.25 m map the planner flies on. The 0.10 m near
                layer (--nearcell 0.10, or "0.10 m near layer" in the window)
                adds close-up detail but is OFF by default: where it hands
                over to the 0.25 m map, at 2.2 m, a surface just past the seam
                drew as a round pale hole in the middle of this pane.
  OVERLAY (v)   the same voxels composited ON the depth image they came from.
                If they land on the trunks, the intrinsics, the frame
                convention and the pose all agree. This is the fastest check
                that the whole geometry chain is right.
  MAP SLICE     top-down. Green ring = how far obstacles are MARKED, orange =
                how far free space is CARVED. They are deliberately different.
  PLAN          faint = primitives that are flyable, green = the one chosen.

THE SIMULATED CAMERA LOOKS 20 DEG DOWN. Level, at the sim's 2.5 m, its
lowest ray meets the ground 4.7 m ahead -- beyond the ~3.5 m the map marks --
so the floor never appeared near the observer (and a low log inside 4.7 m
was invisible too). Tilted 20 deg the floor is mapped from 2.2 m out. The
startup [geom] line prints this for whatever tilt is set. Change it with
"camera tilt" in the window or --pitch; a real camera's tilt comes from its
IMU instead.

THE CAMERA IS ASSUMED TO BE HELD STILL. There is no odometry yet, so if you
walk around with it the map will be wrong. That is a missing subsystem, not a
bug in this program.


A menu opens. Click a world, choose Simulated stereo or Perfect (control),
and for the forest choose Open stand or Follow a trail. Then FLY. Keep this
whole folder together - the exe needs the DLLs beside it and reads worlds\
for the Hervanta / Tampere / Helsinki maps.

  IN FLIGHT
    space   pause
    r       restart the same run
    m       back to the menu
    q       quit
    - +     playback speed: 0.25x 0.5x 1x 2x 4x max
    v       FIRST PERSON <-> outside view of the voxel model
    [ ]     view distance of the voxel model: 20 / 32 / 44 / 60 m
    s       toggle voxel-model spin
    <- ->   rotate the voxel model

  WHAT YOU ARE LOOKING AT
    TRUTH + path        the real world, flown trail red, planned path green,
                        forest trails pale blue
    FIRST PERSON        the map from INSIDE, out of the aircraft's own eyes.
                        This is the default top-right pane; v swaps it for
                        the outside view. Pale is UNKNOWN, never empty -
                        where the map is wrong you fly into fog. It looks
                        short because it IS short: at 0.25 m voxels on a
                        12 cm baseline the map can only honestly mark
                        obstacles to about 5 m.
    VOXEL MODEL         the 3D map the aircraft actually built, as solid
                        blocks, with its flown path, its plan and the
                        heading it is currently commanding drawn into it.
                        Block colour is height RELATIVE TO YOU: red is at
                        your altitude and is what you would hit, green is
                        below, blue above.
    VOXEL MAP           a horizontal slice - grey means UNKNOWN, not empty
    DEPTH               what the camera returned; grey = no stereo match

  WORTH KNOWING
    Fly every world TWICE, once on stereo and once on Perfect. If it fails on
    Perfect depth the planner is at fault; if only on stereo, the sensor is the
    limit. That comparison found three real bugs in an afternoon.

    It wanders safely rather than arriving - no configuration reaches its goal
    yet. That is a known open problem, not a broken install.

    This build has no OMPL (no clean Windows port), so the forward planner uses
    a straight-line probe. The reactive layer does the obstacle avoidance and is
    unaffected.

  BATCH RUNS
    voxel_sim.exe is the scriptable version. One run you watched is an anecdote;
    sweep.sh runs every world x every seed and prints a table. Useful flags:

      cmake --build build --target voxel_sim
      voxel_sim.exe --world forest --seed 3 --truth --csv run.csv
      voxel_sim.exe --world osm --buildings worlds\helsinki_centre.txt --cell 0.5

    --truth   perfect depth instead of simulated stereo (ALWAYS run this too)
    --seed N  different generated world
    --csv F   per-step log for offline analysis
    --display live view


RL PATH-POLICY HARNESS
----------------------

The point is a comparison, not a model: a learned planner scored in the SAME
columns as the classical ones, on seeds it never trained on.

    kestrel bench    the non-RL side: NINE classical planners through the
                     same environment the policy uses, so the comparison is
                     between planners and not between two harnesses. START
                     HERE -- these are the numbers a policy has to beat.
                     Needs nothing installed.

                       random    uniform over what geometry admits: the floor
                       freeM     steer where the map confirms the most free
                                 space. The strongest of the old four, and
                                 it buys its safety by circling
                       goal      straight at the goal, ignoring what is in
                                 the way
                       score     a hand-tuned mix, goal-weighted

                     THE FIRST FOUR WERE WRITTEN WHEN REACHING A GOAL WAS
                     THE SCORE, and two of them optimise distance to a goal
                     that nothing pays for any more. What is scored here is
                     safe travel -- metres flown before something stops it,
                     ground covered, distance from the spawn -- so five more
                     planners are matched to that:

                       freeG     freeM projected onto the GROUND and charged
                                 for turning. Free path length rewards a
                                 steep climb, which covers no ground; this is
                                 also the smallest change that could fix
                                 freeM's circling, so it says how much of
                                 that is just "freeM does not mind turning"
                       novelG    freeG, avoiding ground already flown over
                       cover     frontier-seeking: head for UNKNOWN, but only
                                 along a path the map has confirmed free
                       frontRaw  the same seeker with the safety gate taken
                                 out. Deliberately unsafe, and the control
                                 that makes the gate measurable: every
                                 collision in this tree has been into
                                 unmapped space
                       circler   turn as hard as geometry allows, forever.
                                 The degenerate solution -- it banks metres
                                 with no displacement and almost no new
                                 ground -- kept as a MEASURED row so the
                                 weakness of the metric is a number and not
                                 an assurance

                     The columns are travel, net (how far from the spawn it
                     ended), cells, loops (travel/net) and minimum clearance.
                     Episodes run under the travel objective, where arriving
                     at the goal does not end them.

                       --policies a b c    run only these, in bench's own
                                           order. A question about the veto is
                                           answered by the two or three
                                           planners that reach it, and paying
                                           for the other six at every point of
                                           a sweep is most of a day.

                       --oracle            THE CEILING: the planner's fine map
                                           is the TRUE world within 8 m. Not a
                                           planner -- it says what perfect map
                                           knowledge would be worth, before
                                           anything is built to approximate it.

                       --corefrac F        how much of the body's own volume
                                           the veto insists is CONFIRMED FREE,
                                           as a fraction of robotR. 0, the
                                           default everywhere, lets a
                                           primitive sweep through air nothing
                                           has measured -- which is why every
                                           collision ever measured in this
                                           tree has been into unmapped space.
                                           The sensor never lied; the veto
                                           permitted the motion.

                     COREFRAC IS QUANTISED BY THE VOXEL, and the number is not
                     continuous. sphereClear walks INTEGER cell offsets, so the
                     squared distances it can test are k*cell^2, and the core
                     condition only changes behaviour as the parameter crosses
                     sqrt(k)*cell/robotR. At 0.25 m cells and a 0.6 m body:

                       below 0.417   the centre cell alone -- a no-op in
                                     practice, since an admissible rollout's
                                     own cell is already free
                       0.417         + the 6 face neighbours    (7 cells)
                       0.589         + the 12 edges             (19 cells)
                       0.722         + the 8 corners            (27 cells)
                       0.932         the whole ball             (57 cells)

                     Sweeping round decimals therefore measures the same thing
                     several times. Sweep the boundaries.

    kestrel demo     THE SHOWCASE, and the only command here whose job is to
                     be watched rather than measured. Four panes at once:

                       SIM DEMONSTRATION  a planner flying the simulated
                                        world, filmed: FPV FOOTAGE of the true
                                        scene, with the map it is building
                                        inset -- first-person as it BELIEVES
                                        (pale is UNKNOWN) and from above with
                                        its track. The gap between footage and
                                        map is what it has measured. Needs no
                                        camera.
                       LIVE DEPTH       what the real sensor returns,
                                        colourised, with the fraction of pixels
                                        that came back at all
                       LIVE VOXEL       FIRST PERSON: that live depth through
                                        the aircraft's own pipeline, the fine
                                        map up close and the far bearing field
                                        beyond, as `kestrel sim` draws it. Grey
                                        is unknown here too. No camera: a
                                        simulated D435i on the sim aircraft
                       HUMANS           people found in the camera image, each
                                        labelled with a RANGE read out of the
                                        depth frame. A box alone is a webcam
                                        trick; a box that says 2.3 m is this
                                        stack

                     WHAT FLIES IS THE AIRCRAFT. Plain `kestrel demo` runs
                     the flight software's own voxel module and mission --
                     compiled from onboard/src, not a copy -- against a
                     simulated D435i at 848x480, the mode that flies, and
                     with no position given to the map, as aboard: it stops,
                     maps from where it hovers, certifies a straight leg,
                     flies it, stops again. The window shows that flight
                     from behind with what the stop's map knows laid over
                     the true scene (blue = air confirmed free, red = cells
                     marked solid), and beside it the stop's voxel map as a
                     model. Underneath is the camera row -- live depth, the
                     live voxel map from the camera's eye, and people with a
                     range each: from a D435i with --live, a recording with
                     --replay, otherwise the aircraft's own simulated camera.
                     Every 30 s it prints how well your machine keeps up.

                     IT RUNS UNTIL YOU CLOSE IT. The default, --world tour,
                     flies the two worlds below in turn -- gallery, hall,
                     gallery on a new layout, and so on. It moves to the
                     next map when the aircraft collides (shown for a
                     moment first), after 3 minutes on one map, or when
                     you press r. The status line says which map it is
                     on. q or Esc quits.

                     TWO WORLDS BUILT FOR THIS VIEW, and they are the
                     default. The first-person voxel pane is a ladder:
                     0.25 m voxels out to about 3.5 m, then 1.0 m, then
                     2.0 m. A forest through that ladder is mush -- a
                     0.3 m trunk is one voxel on the fine rung and gone
                     on the coarse one, and nothing in the scene is
                     aligned to anything, so the geometry appears to
                     CHANGE as you fly at it. That is correct behaviour
                     and it is indistinguishable, to anyone watching,
                     from the map being broken.

                       gallery   a grid of rooms, walls on every cell
                                 edge, doorways through most of them and
                                 a free-standing block in about half the
                                 rooms. 14-24 m walls, so over is not a
                                 route
                       hall      the same, tighter and roofed: more solid
                                 edges, so more dead ends, and a ceiling,
                                 so the map closes overhead and UNKNOWN
                                 above you matters

                     THERE IS NO OPEN GROUND, and that is structural
                     rather than a matter of turning a density up. A
                     free-standing obstacle has to be smaller than its
                     cell or there is no lane past it -- so with scattered
                     obstacles a lane is exactly what is always there,
                     and an aircraft crossing that flies more or less
                     straight. Two versions of this world failed that way
                     before the walls moved onto the cell EDGES. Then the
                     open space is a room, bounded on four sides by
                     construction, and the only way out is a doorway:
                     the view always has a wall in it and getting
                     anywhere means finding and lining up on a gap.

                     Measured on the shipped settings, 400 steps, two
                     seeds: every classical planner flew its whole budget
                     with no collisions, at a minimum clearance of
                     0.64-0.98 m against a 0.6 m robot radius. It is
                     threading doorways, not sailing past them.

                     Every surface in both sits on a 2.0 m lattice and
                     every extent is a multiple of 2.0 m. 2.0 is the
                     COARSEST rung's cell and the finer rungs divide it
                     exactly, so one wall face is one coarse voxel, four
                     mid ones, sixty-four fine ones, over the same
                     volume. Approaching a wall SUBDIVIDES it and never
                     moves it.

                     The spawn sets the phase of all three map rungs --
                     VoxelMap::init puts its origin at centre minus
                     30.0, 64.0 or 128.0 m, all multiples of 2.0 -- so
                     the generator returns a start on the lattice rather
                     than letting anything pick one. gallery_lattice_check
                     asserts all of it in ctest: every solid voxel must
                     fill a WHOLE 2 m cell, and a cell that is part solid
                     is a wall that moves as you approach it.

                     The six training worlds are still on the list, since
                     the demo should be able to show what the policy was
                     actually measured in. They are not the default, and
                     gallery and hall are deliberately NOT added to the
                     world lists bench, watch, evaluate and report use --
                     a world nothing has trained on would quietly change
                     every one of those tables.

                     FOUR THREADS, and not for show. The sim steps as fast as
                     the planner allows, the camera arrives at 30 Hz whatever
                     anyone wants, a person detector is tens of milliseconds a
                     frame, and the window wants to redraw smoothly regardless.
                     One loop makes every pane as slow as the slowest, which on
                     a laptop is the detector, and a 6 Hz first-person view
                     looks broken. Each stage owns a thread and publishes its
                     latest finished frame; the compositor never waits.

                       kestrel demo                    everything off the sim
                       kestrel demo --live             depth from a D435i
                       kestrel demo --replay walk.kdr  from a recording
                       kestrel demo --world maze       stay in one world (the
                                                       layout still changes
                                                       after each crash)
                       kestrel demo --pane 640         bigger panes
                       kestrel demo --no-people        drop the detector pane
                       kestrel demo --live --pose vio  the live voxel pane
                                                       placed by DepthVio (or
                                                       slam: ORB-SLAM3) instead
                                                       of a fixed position
                       kestrel demo --shot PREFIX      every pane to PNG, with
                                                       no camera and no display
                       kestrel demo --check            assert the layout. Runs
                                                       in ctest.

                     WITH NO CAMERA IT STILL RUNS. The two live panes fall back
                     to the planner's own simulated stereo and SAY SO on the
                     pane. Every pane names what it is actually showing -- a
                     classical planner is captioned as one, and a missing
                     detector is captioned as missing. A demo that mislabels
                     its own panes is worse than a demo with fewer panes.

                     THE POLICY. --model FILE takes a .onnx exported from a
                     checkpoint and flies it through OpenCV's dnn, so there is
                     no python at demo time and nothing to install on the
                     machine you are showing it on. Without one it flies the
                     classical planner named by --fallback (default freeM, the
                     best planner measured here) and the pane says "flying
                     freeM (classical)" rather than "learned".

                     GETTING A POLICY INTO IT. The pane says "learned"
                     only when it is flying one, so a checkpoint has to
                     be exported first -- on the machine that trained,
                     once:

                       kestrel train --script export_onnx.py RUN/final.zip

                     That writes RUN/final.onnx and then CHECKS IT: it
                     replays real observations from a real VoxelEnv
                     through both the PyTorch policy and the exported
                     graph as OpenCV reads it, and DELETES the file
                     unless every masked argmax agrees. An export that is
                     subtly wrong produces a demo that flies badly and
                     looks like a bad policy, which is unfalsifiable from
                     the outside; this is the same gate cuda_depth_check
                     applies to the CUDA renderer.

                     Then, on any machine, with nothing installed:

                       kestrel demo --model final.onnx

                     Without --model the pane flies the planner named by
                     --fallback (default freeM) and is captioned
                     "flying freeM (classical)" -- never "learned".

                     CUDA, FOR THE TWO NETWORKS AND NOTHING ELSE.

                       kestrel demo --cuda      require a GPU
                       kestrel demo --no-cuda   refuse one
                       (neither)                take one if it is there

                     --cuda moves the policy and the person detector onto
                     the GPU through OpenCV's dnn CUDA backend. It does
                     NOT touch the simulator's depth renderer: that has
                     its own build switch, NAVSIM_WITH_CUDA, guarding a
                     kernel whose own header says it has never been
                     compiled or run and which cuda_depth_check gates.
                     Turning that on from the demo would be shipping an
                     unvalidated kernel inside the one command whose job
                     is to be believed.

                     HOG gets nothing from it: its GPU version lives in
                     opencv_contrib's cudaobjdetect, which this build does
                     not require, so with --detector hog the people pane
                     says cpu and means it.

                     --cuda REFUSES TO START without a visible device,
                     deliberately: a flag that passes silently on a
                     machine with no GPU is how a rehearsal becomes a
                     surprise. Leave it off to take a GPU when there is
                     one. Whichever happens, the status line along the
                     bottom names the backend each network actually got,
                     so the frame rate on screen always has the right
                     label under it.

                     PEOPLE. The default detector is YOLOX-nano, COMPILED INTO
                     kestrel.exe -- no model file, no download, no network on
                     the day. It finds partial, sitting, turned and distant
                     people, and runs in tens of milliseconds on a laptop CPU.
                     It is Apache-2.0 (Megvii), so shipping the exe needs only
                     its licence notice (models/LICENSE-YOLOX); the
                     Ultralytics YOLO models, AGPL-3.0, were passed over for
                     exactly that reason.

                       kestrel demo --detector hog       OpenCV's HOG instead:
                                                         upright, whole people
                                                         only, but ~6 ms
                       kestrel demo --detector FILE.onnx any detector in the
                                                         YOLOX, YOLOv5 or
                                                         YOLOv8/11 layout

                     Mind the licence of a FILE you load: fine to use, but
                     distributing an exe WITH an AGPL model inside puts the
                     exe under the AGPL too. Range always comes from the DEPTH
                     frame, never from how tall the box is, because guessing
                     distance from apparent height means assuming how tall
                     someone is and this stack does not have to.

    kestrel train    train. Expect 8-18 hours at 10 M steps with stereo.

                     WHERE THE POLICY GOES: a dated folder inside
                     kestrel-runs on your DESKTOP, e.g.
                     Desktop\kestrel-runs\run-20260908-1543. A OneDrive
                     Desktop is found too, which is where Windows usually
                     redirects it. --name labels a run instead of dating it,
                     --out puts it anywhere you like, and the absolute path
                     is printed on the first line either way.

                     One folder PER RUN on purpose: sharing a directory would
                     let a short run's ppo_50000 sit beside a long run's
                     ppo_9000000, and --resume picks by step count, so the
                     short run would silently inherit the long one's weights.
                     Bare --resume continues the NEWEST run rather than
                     starting an empty one.

                     Inside: ppo_<n>_steps.zip every ~50 k steps, final.zip at
                     the end, and tb\ for TensorBoard.

                     LIVE STATS WHILE IT TRAINS, headless, no window. Every
                     rollout prints a per-world scorecard beside SB3's usual
                     reward table:

                       world       eps    travel   closest   crash   goals
                       maze          6     18.8m     19.2m     17%       0
                       corridor      1     24.6m     40.6m      0%       0

                     Per world because the average over a 30 m maze and a
                     340 m city describes neither, and over a rolling window
                     so it shows what the policy does NOW. The same numbers
                     go to TensorBoard under score/<world>/.

                     TRAIN UNTIL YOU STOP IT:  kestrel train --forever
                     or set steps to "forever" on the train panel. Ctrl-C
                     ends it and THE WEIGHTS ARE SAVED ON THE WAY OUT, so
                     stopping by hand costs nothing -- watch the live
                     scorecard and end the run when it stops improving,
                     instead of guessing a step count in advance. A second
                     Ctrl-C abandons the run without saving, if you mean it.
                     Resume what you stopped with --resume.

                     The step counts on the panel now run 20 k to 100 M plus
                     forever, and "save every" sets the checkpoint interval --
                     which matters most on a forever run, where the
                     checkpoints ARE the record of how it progressed.

                     THE GOAL HAS TO FIT INSIDE AN EPISODE, and the run now
                     CHECKS before it starts. Per world it prints the journey
                     and the steps that journey needs at the 0.09 m per step a
                     planner actually holds, and says TOO FAR where it does
                     not fit:

                       world        journey    needs   budget
                       forest           175m     1944     3000
                       city             184m     2042     3000

                     This has bitten twice. At --max-steps 1500 the forest
                     goal needed 1944 steps, so nothing could ever arrive. And
                     the city goal was at the opposite corner of a 300 m world
                     -- a 367.7 m straight line, and straight line is a LOWER
                     bound on the path, because a city is a grid and you go
                     round blocks. Measured over 3000 steps the best classical
                     planner covers 260-278 m of path in every world here; it
                     saturates. So the city goal was out of reach by a wide
                     margin however well anything flew, and it showed up as
                     "the policy cannot learn cities" for fifteen million
                     steps: city reached its goal 10-17 % of the time against
                     road's 98-100 %, and the ordering across all six worlds
                     tracked journey length almost exactly. The city journey
                     is now 183.8 m, matching road. The far half of the city
                     is still built and still in the way -- it is the JOURNEY
                     that is the size of an episode, not the map.

                     --vary-goal had the same problem for the same reason: the
                     minimum separation was six tenths of the BOX diagonal,
                     which in the city meant every sampled journey was at
                     least 229 m. It is six tenths of the world's own nominal
                     journey now, which is the number that was already sized
                     to fit.

                     HOW MUCH RANDOM STUFF IT TRIES, AND FOR HOW LONG:

                       kestrel train --explore 0.04
                       kestrel train --anneal 20000000
                       kestrel train --target-kl 0.02
                       kestrel train --anneal 0        (the old behaviour)

                     or the "explore", "anneal" and "target-kl" steppers on
                     the train panel.

                     --explore is the PPO entropy bonus: how much probability
                     the policy keeps spreading over primitives it has not
                     tried, instead of committing early to the first thing
                     that worked. In a 210-way action space over six worlds
                     that is worth paying for early. Default 0.02, double the
                     old fixed value; try 0.04-0.08 if a run plateaus with a
                     whole world unsolved.

                     --anneal is how many steps the learning rate AND
                     --explore take to fall to a tenth of where they started
                     (default: the length of the run, or 20 M for --forever).
                     Exploration belongs early; committing belongs late.
                     Neither floors at zero -- a policy pinned to argmax
                     cannot recover from a world that surprises it, and a
                     learning rate of zero turns "still training" into
                     "burning CPU". --anneal 0 holds both constant, which is
                     what every run before this did.

                     --target-kl abandons the rest of an update once the
                     policy has moved that far, so one bad batch cannot undo
                     an hour. 0 turns it off.

                     WHY THESE EXIST: a 15 M-step run peaked around 14.3 M and
                     then went backwards -- collision rate 0.169 -> 0.233,
                     goal rate 0.700 -> 0.622, mean return ~180 -> ~120 -- with
                     a learning rate and an entropy bonus that were hard
                     constants for the whole run and nothing bounding a single
                     update. That is the ordinary way a good policy drifts off
                     a solution it already found, not a bug.

                     THE NEAR-MISS PENALTY NOW SCALES WITH THE WORLD:
                     The collision penalty is a cliff -- it arrives once, at
                     the end, after the mistake is already unrecoverable. The
                     clearance term is the gradient: a small cost every step
                     for flying closer to something than 0.8 m, and the only
                     avoidance signal that exists BEFORE contact. Progress was
                     made scale-free so every world pays the same for closing
                     the same fraction of its journey; the clearance term was
                     left in metres, so against progress it was about five
                     times weaker in a tight world than an open one -- exactly
                     the wrong way round. It is now scaled the same way.
                     --raw-clear restores the old absolute term for comparison
                     with runs made before this, and the button on the train
                     panel says which one you are using.

                     NORMALISING THE RETURN: measured, and it did not
                     work. OFF by default; --norm-reward turns it on.

                     The story is worth keeping because the reasoning was
                     wrong in an instructive way. Raising the value horizon
                     from 200 steps to 1000 made the critic look broken:

                       explained_variance   200 steps: +0.705
                                           1000 steps: +0.286

                     so the reward was divided by the running standard
                     deviation of the discounted return, to keep value
                     targets order-1. It did not help:

                       explained_variance  +0.286 -> +0.250   (slightly worse)
                       worst update         -8.75 -> -75.60   (much worse)
                       held-out, 18 eps     a wash: 0 -> 1 arrivals,
                                            14 -> 12 orbits, 0 collisions both

                     explained_variance is 1 - Var(y-yhat)/Var(y), which is
                     SCALE-INVARIANT by construction -- dividing every target
                     by a constant cannot change it. What normalising actually
                     fixed was value_loss, ~500 -> ~0.05, and that was only
                     ever the units. The running standard deviation also
                     drifts as training goes on, so the same state's target
                     moves, and that non-stationarity is a plausible source of
                     the -75.60.

                     AND THE COMPARISON ITSELF WAS UNSOUND. Comparing
                     explained_variance across two different gammas compares
                     two different prediction problems: a 200-step return is
                     dominated by the near future and is genuinely easier to
                     predict than a 1000-step one. +0.705 does not mean
                     "better critic", it partly means "easier question". The
                     only sound comparison is between runs that share a gamma.

                     --clip-vf bounds the value update the way PPO bounds the
                     policy update (SB3 leaves it off). It is applied only
                     with --norm-reward: against raw returns in the hundreds a
                     0.2 clip would freeze the critic rather than steady it.

                     WHAT IS NOT NORMALISED, and why: the observations. Every
                     feature was measured into [-1, 1.32] with an overall std
                     of 0.37, so there is nothing to gain -- and normalising
                     them would push running statistics through evaluate,
                     watch and report, any of which could then silently fly a
                     policy on differently-scaled inputs.

                     MAKING TWO RUNS COMPARABLE:  kestrel train --seed 7
                     or the "seed" stepper on the train panel (0 = off, the
                     old behaviour).

                     It fixes three things at once: the policy's initial
                     weights, PPO's sampling, and the stream of worlds each
                     worker draws. Two runs with the same seed and the same
                     flags are the SAME run -- verified by training twice at
                     --seed 42 and comparing all 12 policy tensors, which came
                     back bit-identical.

                     That is what makes an A/B of a training setting mean
                     anything. Without it two runs also differ by whatever the
                     random initialisation happened to be, and over a short run
                     that is most of the difference -- so you are comparing two
                     samples from a noisy distribution and calling it a result.

                     IT STARTS FROM SCRATCH UNLESS YOU SAY OTHERWISE:

                       kestrel train --resume            newest checkpoint
                       kestrel train --resume PATH.zip   a specific one

                     or the "start from scratch / resume from newest" button
                     on the train panel.

                     LEARNING BY CRASHING:  kestrel train --no-veto
                     Normally the geometric veto hides every primitive that
                     flies into something the map has seen, so the policy
                     picks among options already approved and CANNOT collide
                     by choosing. --no-veto hands it everything, so it hits
                     walls, takes the -50, and has to learn avoidance itself.
                     Measured with a random policy in the forest: 10 of 12
                     runs collide without the veto against 4 of 12 with it,
                     and mean travel drops from 17.1 m to 8.1 m.
                     Note the 4: the veto only rejects what the map has
                     CONFIRMED, and at 0.25 m voxels that is about 3.5 m
                     ahead, so it reduces collisions rather than abolishing
                     them. Watch one with  kestrel watch --no-veto . Scratch is right for a clean
                     comparison; resume is right after an interrupted
                     overnight run. Resuming continues the step counter, so
                     the TensorBoard curve carries on instead of restarting
                     and looking like a policy that learned instantly.

    kestrel watch    WATCH IT FLY WHILE IT TRAINS. A grid of live panes, one
                     episode each, in the first-person voxel view -- what the
                     aircraft believes it can see, the same picture the sim
                     labels "VOXEL FPV". It reloads the newest checkpoint as
                     training writes them, on seeds training never uses, so you
                     are watching the policy improve rather than replaying it.
                     Run it in a second window alongside `kestrel train`.

                       kestrel watch --panes 4 --worlds maze forest
                       kestrel watch --layout top      plan view instead
                       kestrel watch --shot grid.png   one PNG, no display

                     PALE IS UNKNOWN, drawn as fog and never as air. In a
                     forest an early episode looks mostly empty and that is
                     correct, not a broken renderer: at 0.25 m voxels the map
                     can only honestly mark obstacles to about 3.5 m, so
                     everything past that is genuinely not yet known. The
                     corner inset is the plan view, because through fog a
                     policy hovering and a policy crossing a clearing look
                     identical.

    kestrel evaluate --baselines
                      THE COMPARISON, in one command and one table: the
                      trained policy and all nine classical planners, on the
                      same held-out seeds, scored by the same code. The
                      baselines come from the same C++ `bench` runs, so there
                      is no second implementation to drift.

                        kestrel evaluate --baselines --seeds 101 132
                        kestrel evaluate --baselines --reward   (per-term too)

                      Takes the newest checkpoint in runs\ppo_voxel unless
                      you pass --model or --run.

                      SIX WORLD STYLES, not two. forest, maze, corridor,
                      city, road, culdesac -- and the generator PARAMETERS
                      are drawn per seed too, so "forest" is not one forest:
                      stem density, block pitch, street width, corridor width
                      and pole spacing all move. Training on forest and maze
                      alone lets a policy learn two modes and pick between
                      them from the first frame, which is a fact about those
                      two worlds rather than obstacle avoidance.

                        corridor  winding random-shape passages, varying
                                  width, branches that sometimes dead-end.
                                  A maze is rectilinear and uniform: "follow
                                  the axis, turn 90 deg at a wall" solves it
                                  without generalising. These have arbitrary
                                  headings and no grid.
                        road      thin, tall and few against open sky --
                                  poles and overhead wires, the worst case
                                  for a stereo mapper.
                        city      building blocks and street canyons.
                        culdesac  a trap with one way out.

                      VARY THE JOURNEY:  --vary-goal
                      Every episode used to fly the SAME route -- forest
                      175 m on a bearing of 36.9 deg, maze 31.8 m at 45 deg,
                      on every seed, with only the trees and walls moving. A
                      policy can score well on that by learning one compass
                      heading and never reading the goal channels at all, and
                      nothing in the scorecard would notice. --vary-goal
                      samples start and goal per episode, both with real
                      clearance and a minimum separation. Pass it to train
                      AND to evaluate, and expect worse numbers: it is a
                      harder task and not comparable with fixed-geometry runs.

                      LONG RUNS ARE THE POINT. The forest goal is 175 m out
                      and needs about 2500 steps; episodes were capped at
                      1500, so nothing could ever arrive. Both training and
                      evaluation now default to 3000 steps per episode, and
                      the scorecard reports CLOSEST approach and the step it
                      happened -- because "never got there" and "got there
                      and drifted off" are different failures and the final
                      distance cannot tell them apart.

                      FOR A REAL COMPARISON USE MORE SEEDS. Four is enough to
                      see a bug and not enough to rank planners; the pilot
                      differences in docs\RL_PILOT_RESULTS.md are inside the
                      noise of four seeds in places, and 30+ is cheap next to
                      the training run it is judging.

  kestrel report [args...]
        HOW IT FAILS, AS PICTURES. Every other view here reports the policy
        as numbers, and a table cannot say why. Six episodes scored on a
        real checkpoint came back as five rows all reading "ran out of
        steps": one had never left the spawn, one had flown the wrong way,
        one was still closing when the budget ran out, and two were
        identical to three significant figures in two differently-generated
        worlds -- which means the policy was not reading the world at all.
        Five different failures, five different fixes, one label.

        TEN OUTCOME CLASSES, not two:
          arrived
          collided, into something it had MAPPED   (with the veto on this
                                                    should be impossible --
                                                    if it happens the veto
                                                    has a bug)
          collided, into something nothing had SEEN (the honest failure; the
                                                    fix is sensing range)
          never left the spawn, and chose to hold
          never left the spawn while asking for speed
          orbited -- travelled a long way, went nowhere
          wrong way -- never got closer than it started
          got close, then drifted off
          still closing, and more steps would have arrived
          still closing, and never going to arrive

        FIVE PANELS, written as PNG beside the weights:
          report_outcomes.png   one bar per world over the ten classes, with
                                the goal rate, crash rate and mean travel
                                under each so it reconciles with `evaluate`
          report_curves.png     every episode's distance to the goal over
                                the episode. Flat at 1.0 is stalled, a
                                sawtooth is orbiting, a V got close and left,
                                a line that stops short was still closing --
                                this is the panel that makes the five
                                "out of steps" classes visually distinct
          report_reward.png     per world, what an ARRIVED episode was paid
                                against a FAILED one, term by term. A return
                                says the policy improved; it cannot say
                                WHICH term it improved
          report_map_<world>.png  every trail flown in one exact world
                                instance, coloured by outcome, with the
                                spawn, each run's closest approach, where it
                                hit, and the goal ring at true scale. This
                                is the one that answers "one choke point, or
                                everywhere".
          report_progress.png   (--progress only) goal rate and fraction of
                                the journey closed, across checkpoints. The
                                second still moves while the first is pinned
                                at zero, which is most of training.

        --no-homeward   HOLD TWO OBSERVATION CHANNELS AT ZERO. g[22] and
                        g[23] say how far the aircraft is from its spawn and
                        which way that lies -- half of what the travel
                        objective pays for, and until they existed nothing
                        in the 1914 inputs encoded it.

                        A checkpoint trained before they carried signal has
                        first-layer weights on them that never received a
                        gradient, because an input of 0 gives a gradient of
                        0, so they still sit at initialisation. Scoring such
                        a policy with the channels live drives two untrained
                        weights with real numbers: the run is noise, and it
                        does not look like noise, it looks like a bad
                        policy.

                        You should not normally need this. report reads the
                        answer out of the run's run.json, and a run with no
                        readable run.json is assumed to predate the channels
                        -- the recoverable mistake. The flag is the override
                        for a --model pointing somewhere with no manifest.
                        It does not affect the baselines, which read only the
                        per-primitive block.

        FLYING AND DRAWING ARE SEPARATE, on purpose. report.py flies the
        episodes and writes report.csv + trace.csv; kestrel draws from those.
        So:

          kestrel report --plot DIR     redraw every panel from a finished
                                        run. No python, no policy, nothing
                                        flown -- changing a plot must never
                                        mean re-running a 20-minute job.
          kestrel report --shot PREFIX  draw every panel from synthetic
                                        records covering all ten classes.
          kestrel report --check        assert the layout. Runs in ctest
                                        beside `gui --check`, with no python
                                        and no checkpoint.

        --repeats N matters more than it looks. A deterministic policy flies
        ONE trail per world instance however many times you ask, and one
        trail says nothing about where failures cluster -- so anything above
        1 samples instead, and the map panel becomes a distribution.

        The run prints the journey-fit table first, so a goal further away
        than the step budget can fly is named before twenty minutes are
        spent on it, and the outcomes panel says how many episodes were
        unwinnable before they started. Those are not policy failures.

Or click `bench` / `train` / `evaluate` / `report` in the window and press RUN.

GRAPHS WHILE IT TRAINS
    python -m tensorboard.main --logdir runs
    then open localhost:6006 -- reward, episode length, explained variance.
    The trainer already writes these; nothing to enable.

BEFORE THE FIRST TRAINING RUN
    python -m pip install -r python\requirements.txt

USE PYTHON 3.11. voxelenv.pyd in this zip is a compiled extension built
against CPython 3.11, and a compiled extension only loads into the minor
version it was built for. On 3.12 or 3.10 it will not import, and the error
says the module is missing rather than that the version is wrong.

    python --version          should say 3.11.x

`kestrel bench`, `kestrel track` and `kestrel sim` need NONE of this. Training
is the only command that runs python, because the trainer is PyTorch and
stable-baselines3; the environment it steps is the C++ in this exe.

The GPU will look idle during training and that is correct, not a
misconfiguration -- the bottleneck is environment steps, which are C++ on the
CPU. train.py --device cuda exists so you can measure that rather than take my
word for it. See docs/RL_HARNESS_PLAN.md section 11 for where CUDA would
actually pay (the depth renderer) and why the rest of the sim must stay on the
CPU (it is the code that flies).

CUDA (optional, and unverified)
-------------------------------

    cmake -B build -DNAVSIM_WITH_CUDA=ON -DNAV_SIM_ALL_TARGETS=ON
    cmake --build build --target cuda_depth_check
    build\Release\cuda_depth_check.exe

ONLY the depth renderer runs on the GPU. The map, the planner and the veto stay
on the CPU because they are the code that flies -- a second GPU implementation
of them would drift from what is deployed, and a policy would then be trained
against a world model that is not the real one.

THE KERNEL HAS NEVER BEEN COMPILED OR RUN by its author: it was written on a
machine with no toolkit and no GPU. cuda_depth_check is the gate. It renders
the same scene both ways and fails if they disagree by more than one voxel, and
it fails hard if the GPU invents a surface the CPU did not see. Run it before
trusting the GPU path; if it fails, build without CUDA and say so.

Expected payoff, MEASURED rather than estimated, and smaller than this file
used to claim. Step time against camera resolution at 160x120 truth depth:

    40x30    7.25 ms      160x120   15.19 ms
    80x60    9.42 ms      320x240   37.88 ms

That fits ~6.8 ms of FIXED cost plus ~4.05 us per pixel. At the 160x120
training default only about half the step scales with pixels, not the three
quarters previously claimed -- and that half is not all render: map.integrate
walks rays per pixel too, now across three map levels. So moving the render
alone to the GPU is worth roughly 1.3-1.5x, not 3-4x.

THE LEVER THAT ACTUALLY WORKS TODAY IS RESOLUTION, and it needs no toolkit:

    kestrel train --cam 80 60      about 1.6x faster than 160x120

The cost is honest -- fewer pixels means shorter effective stereo range and
more dropout, so it is a fidelity trade rather than free speed.

AND CUDA CANNOT GIVE YOU MORE PARALLEL ENVIRONMENTS. Each env is
single-threaded CPU: the map, the 210 primitive rollouts, the veto. Workers
saturate at about the thread count and then plateau. Massively more parallel
envs would mean putting the environment itself on the GPU, which is a rewrite
and collides with the rule above -- the map, the planner and the veto are the
code that flies, and a second GPU implementation would drift from what is
deployed.
